3 THE PACK
3.1 PACK DEFINITION
3.1.1 The pack is defined by the largest group of in-bounds and upright Blockers in
proximity and containing members from both teams.
3.1.1.1 The Jammers are not part of the pack.
3.1.1.2 Proximity is defined as not more than 10 feet (3 meters) (as measured
from the hips) in front of or behind the nearest pack Skater.
3.1.1.3 In order to form a pack, a team must have at least one Blocker on the
track at all times.
3.1.2 When two or more groups of Blockers equal in number are on the track, are more
than 10 feet (3 meters) from one another, and no single group meets the pack
definition, no pack can be defined. Skaters will be issued a penalty for intentionally
creating a No Pack situation, or destroying the pack (see Section 5.10.2). Both
teams are responsible for maintaining a legally defined pack. A Skater or group of
Skaters is always responsible for the consequences of their actions. If their actions
create a No Pack situation (except those covered in Section 5.10.2.3), they should
be penalized as directed in Sections 5.10.11 – 5.10.21.
3.1.2.1 Distances for determining the pack and the Engagement Zone are
measured as the shortest distance parallel to the inside track boundary
between Skaters’ hips (see Glossary for Hips).
3.2 PRE-JAM POSITIONING
3.2.1 At the start of a jam, all Skaters must be in position with the Blockers in front of the
Jammers (see Section 2.1.2).
3.2.1.1 Blockers are in position if they are between the Jammer Line and the
Pivot Line (measured counter-clockwise) at the start of the jam. No
Blockers may be touching the Jammer Line, and only the Pivots may
be touching the Pivot Line when the jam starts. Blockers must be in a
position, at the start of the jam, such that a pack exists behind the Pivot
Line and in front of the Jammer Line either at or immediately after the
jam-starting whistle.
3.2.1.1.1 It is required that more than half of the on-the-track Blockers
from each team begin in this pre-jam positioning. An Illegal
Procedure penalty will be assessed to the Pivot in that jam of
the team(s) that did not field enough Blockers in proper prejam
position (see Section 5.13.8.2).
3.2.1.1.1.1 If all of one team’s Blockers are lined up out of
position per Section 3.2.1.1, a Delay of Game
penalty should be issued when the 30 seconds
between jams has expired (see Section 5.15.6).
3.2.1.2 At the jam-starting whistle, Blockers are permitted to be either upright or
down on one knee.
3.2.1.2.1 Blockers may not intentionally take starting positions that
purposefully prolong that Skater’s ability to return to an in-play
position or a team’s ability to reform a pack (e.g., intentionally
starting on one’s back, intentionally starting in a dog pile)
(see Section 5.13.25).
3.2.2 Pivot Starting Position: Only the Pivots may line up on the Pivot Line. Pivots are
considered on the Pivot Line when they are upright and also touching the line.
3.2.3 Non-Pivot Blocker Starting Positions: Blockers line up in any order behind the Pivots
as demarked by the hips. If a Pivot is not upright and on the Pivot Line, Non-Pivot
Blockers are not required to line up behind that Pivot.
3.2.4 Jammer Starting Position: Jammers may line up anywhere between the Jammer
Line and the Pivot Line (measured clockwise). Jammers may line up touching the
Jammer Line, but may not be touching the Pivot Line.
3.2.5 The pack and Jammers may begin rolling at the jam-starting whistle from the
designated Official.
3.2.6 Jammers may not be accelerating at the jam-starting whistle. They are, however,
permitted to be moving, coasting, or braking.
3.2.7 Skaters who line up completely outside of their legal starting area (but fully inside
the track boundary) will be issued a penalty (see Section 5.13.8).
3.2.8 Skaters who line up fully in bounds but in an illegal starting position (while touching
their legal starting area) are considered to have committed a False Start, and will
receive a False Start warning. Once warned, Skaters who False Start must cease
all forward motion until they have yielded to all Skaters in the immediate vicinity
by ceding relative position to those Skaters, or they may be issued a penalty (see
Section 5.13.7).
3.2.8.1 If, after the warning, no Skaters are in the immediate vicinity of a Skater
who has false started (in the clockwise direction), the false-starting Skater
must come to a complete stop in order to yield. After yielding, they may
skate normally.
3.2.8.2 If a false-starting Skater attempts to cede relative position (by coming
to a stop), but no other Skaters make an attempt to take back said
advantage, the false-starting Skater is no longer required to yield.
3.2.8.3 Prior to yielding, a Blocker who has false started is not considered part of
the pack.
3.2.8.4 Prior to yielding, any Skaters passed by a false-starting Jammer do not
count towards earning Lead Jammer status.
3.3 JAM POSITIONING
3.3.1 During the jam, Skaters must remain in play. Skaters who leave play may not
engage, or be engaged, and must return to play. Skaters who engage while out of
play, or who do not return to play, may be subject to penalties specified in Section
5.10 - Out of Play.
3.3.1.1 Skaters who are out of play may legally counter-block.
3.3.2 Blockers must also maintain a pack at all times. When there is no pack, Blockers
must immediately act to form a pack, and may be penalized if they fail to do so.
Figure 1: In/Out of Play Example
• In the diagram, Group C is the pack as it is the largest group
of Blockers skating in proximity and containing members of
both teams.
• The two Blockers in Group B are not part of the pack because
they are more than 10 feet (3 meters) from the nearest pack
Skater, but are still considered “in play” as they are within 20
feet (6 meters) of the nearest pack Skater.
• The two Blockers in Group A are considered “out of play”
since they are more than 20 feet (6 meters) from the nearest
pack Skater. Skaters in Group A will be warned that they are
out of play and will be penalized if they do not immediately
thereafter attempt to return to the Engagement Zone. If they
block or assist, they may also receive Out of Play penalties, regardless
of whether they have been warned (see Section 5.10 - Out of Play).
3.3.3 Blockers who are out of play will receive an Out of Play warning from a Referee. At
this point, the Blocker must immediately attempt to return to play.
3.3.3.1 While outside of the Engagement Zone, a Blocker must yield the right of
way to the opposing Jammer by physically moving out of the Jammer’s
path. Any engagement, including passive/positional blocking, may
result in a penalty. A warning is not required before issuing a penalty for
blocking while out of play (see Section 5.10 - Out of Play).
3.3.3.2 A Blocker who is out of play must return to the Engagement Zone in the
opposite way that Blocker left.
3.3.3.2.1 If the Blocker exited the front of the Engagement Zone, that
Blocker must drop back to legally return to play.
3.3.3.2.2 To regain position after having fallen behind, a Blocker must
return to the back of the Engagement Zone by skating within
the track boundaries to legally return to play.
3.3.3.2.3 Any Blocker who returns to the Engagement Zone in an illegal
manner, such as lapping the pack or being lapped by the
pack, is subject to penalties (see Sections 5.10.14 and 5.10.15).
3.3.4 If no pack can be defined, all Blockers will receive a No Pack warning from a
Referee. At this point, all Blockers must immediately attempt to reform the pack.
3.3.5 Jammers are in play whenever they are upright and in bounds.
3.3.5.1 If an out-of-play opposing Blocker initiates contact with a Jammer, the
Jammer may legally counter-block.
3.3.5.2 If a Jammer initiates contact with an out-of-play opposing Blocker, the
Blocker may legally counter-block.
3.3.6 Skaters may not engage, or be engaged, while out of bounds (except where
specified in Section 5.8 - Out of Bounds Engagement).
3.3.7 Skaters may not engage, or be engaged, while down (except where specified in
Section 5.3 - Low Blocking and Section 5.16 - Misconduct/Gross Misconduct).
3.3.8 Skaters may leave play mid-jam by removing themselves from the track, in order
to remain safe. This includes but is not limited to a Skater leaving the track due to
injury, or to adjust or reposition the Skater’s safety equipment or skates. Skaters who
exit the track for other reasons may be subject to penalties under Section 5.12 -
Skating Out of Bounds.
3.3.9 Airborne Skaters retain their prior in-bounds,out-of-bounds, or straddling status until
they land. Note that passes achieved while airborne do not count towards gaining
lead, and do not earn points, unless the Skater also lands in bounds (see Section
7.1.3.3).